---
layout: post
title:  "Laws can't make people act altruistically"
date:   2016-09-27
---

I noticed this morning that you can't always use laws to incentivise everyone in a society to behave in a socially optimal way.

This surprised me. Economics talks a lot about the common situation where trades don't significantly affect anyone but the buyer and seller; in that situation, selfish individuals produce the socially optimal outcome.

In the case of externalities, selfish individuals no longer produce the social optimal outcome. But you can still incentivise everyone to behave optimally with a Pigouvian tax. If everyone chooses social policy together behind a veil of ignorance, and then goes back to being individually selfish after choosing a policy, they'll end up with the best outcome.

You can't do this in the case of optimal taxation though. That is, the optimal tax policy does not get you to a situation as good as if your citizens are altruistic.

Suppose you have an island with two workers, Alice and Bob. Alice is more competent--she makes $20 an hour and Bob makes $10. Alice and Bob both enjoy swimming in the warm ocean, as well as spending money. Their utility is logarithmic in income, and linear in how much time they spend swimming.

Every day, Alice and Bob have ten hours to allocate to either working or swimming. If their wage is $l w$, and they work for $l t$ time, their utility is

$$ U = \log(w \cdot t) + (10 - t)$$

What's the socially optimal income? Equal

So we're always better off with Alice working $l t$ more, and Bob working $l 2t$ less
