---
layout: post
title:  "What the economics literature says about optimal tax rates"
date:   2016-09-27
---

I’ve spent a bunch of time recently reading the economics literature on optimal taxation. One of the key things I've been convinced of is that we'd probably be better off with much higher income tax rates for high income people. I've also been convinced that it makes sense to have high marginal tax rates on low incomes, but it turns out we do that already.

Economists think about optimal taxation using a framework first introduced in a 1971 paper by J. A. Mirrilees[4]. In this framework, we have a society of people with varying wages. Everyone chooses how many hours to work based on a utility function which looks something like:

$^$ \text{utility} = \log(\text{post tax income}) + \text{hours of leisure}$^$

Obviously, the more hours you work, the more money you make, but also the less leisure time you have.

How much money does the government want to raise from income taxes? You can formalize this a few different ways, but I think the most elegant phrasing is to say that the income tax is just raising revenue for a universal basic income. So everyone gets taxed, and everyone gets a UBI which equals the average tax bill.

So the whole game is to come up with a tax function based on income which increases the overall utility of society as much as possible. You can break this down into two criteria: equality and efficiency.

Because everyone has diminishing marginal returns on income, society is better off the more equitably the income is distributed. Income in the US is extremely unequally distributed. [3] points this out in a more aggressive fashion than I probably would have:

> Raising the tax rate on the top percentile obviously reduces the utility of high-income tax filers. If we denote by $$ g$$ the social marginal value of $1 of consumption for top income earners (measured relative to government revenue), the direct welfare cost is g multiplied by the change in tax revenue collected.5 Because the government values redistribution, the social marginal value of consumption for top- bracket tax  lers is small relative to that of the average person in the economy, and so g is small and as a  rst approximation can be ignored. A utilitarian social welfare criterion with marginal utility of consumption declining to zero, the most commonly used speci cation in optimal tax models, has this implication. For example, if the social value of utility is logarithmic in consumption, then social marginal welfare weights are inversely proportional to consumption. In that case, the social marginal utility at the $1,364,000 average income of the top 1 percent in 2007 (Piketty and Saez, 2003) is only 3.9 percent of the social marginal utility of the median family, with income $52,700 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2009).

So obviously equitability is really important.

But income taxes are distortionary and end up causing dead weight loss. Everyone in society ends up working a socially non-optimal amount as a result of marginal taxes.

There's an interesting subtlety here, which is that *average* tax rates aren't as distortionary as *marginal* tax rates. If someone's going to be making a particular income, you want them to pay all their taxes on the average and not on the margin. This means that in some situations, [the optimal tax system involves marginal tax rates which fall as income rises](/2016/10/02/tax.html).

I was convinced of this by Diamond and Saez [3]. You should read recommendation 1 from that paper for the full story, but I'll attempt to summarize it here.

Their argument starts out by pointing out that high income people have very low marginal utility of money:

> Raising the tax rate on the top percentile obviously reduces the utility of high-income tax filers. If we denote by $$ g$$ the social marginal value of $1 of consumption for top income earners (measured relative to government revenue), the direct welfare cost is g multiplied by the change in tax revenue collected.5 Because the government values redistribution, the social marginal value of consumption for top- bracket tax  lers is small relative to that of the average person in the economy, and so g is small and as a  rst approximation can be ignored. A utilitarian social welfare criterion with marginal utility of consumption declining to zero, the most commonly used speci cation in optimal tax models, has this implication. For example, if the social value of utility is logarithmic in consumption, then social marginal welfare weights are inversely proportional to consumption. In that case, the social marginal utility at the $1,364,000 average income of the top 1 percent in 2007 (Piketty and Saez, 2003) is only 3.9 percent of the social marginal utility of the median family, with income $52,700 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2009).

So we can basically ignore their utility, and optimize tax rates on the rich to extract as much money from them as possible:

> Since the goal of the marginal rates on very high incomes is to get revenue in order to hold down taxes on lower earners, this equation does not depend on the total revenue needs of the government.

What's the correct rate? Well, first we need to know the shape of the distribution of wages.

$^$\tau* = \frac{1}{1 + ae}$^$

They continue:





## Low incomes should have high marginal tax rates



## Have


[1] Optimal Taxation in Theory and Practice
[2] http://eml.berkeley.edu/~saez/diamond-saezJEP11full.pdf
[3] The Case for a Progressive Tax: From Basic Research to Policy Recommendations†
[4] http://aida.econ.yale.edu/~dirkb/teach/pdf/mirrlees/1971%20optimal%20taxation.pdf
