---
layout: post
title:  "An extremely brief summary of quantum chemistry"
date:   "2017-09-13"
tags: physics
---

**Epistemic status: This is my attempt at synthesizing settled science in a somewhat unusual way. There might be minor mathematial errors.**

Here's my summary of how you determine properties of molecules by directly analyzing them with quantum mechanics. Using the physics I describe here, we can determine from first principles chemical properties like the bond lengths, bond angles, [enthalpy of formation](https://chem.libretexts.org/Core/Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry/Thermodynamics/State_Functions/Enthalpy/Standard_Enthalpy_Of_Formation), and ionization energies of any molecule.

Throughout this post, I use [atomic units](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atomic_units).

Given some number of atoms, eg "two atoms of hydrogen and an atom of oxygen", we analyze the molecule by trying to find the lowest energy configuration of all the nuclei and electrons involved. (The internal structure of nuclei is not relevant to chemistry.) Once we know this minimum-energy state (henceforth called the "ground state"), we can answer questions like "what's the distance between the oxygen atom and the hydrogen atoms" or "what's the angle between the hydrogen atoms".

### Types

In quantum chemistry, we approximate nuclei as classical point particles, so each is just described by its position:

```haskell
type Position = (Real, Real, Real)
```

The type of the nucleus positions is therefore an n-tuple of `Position`s, where n is the number of nuclei.

```haskell
type NucleusConfiguration = (Position)^n
```

We also need to describe the state of all electrons. This is done by the joint electron wavefunction. To define it, we first need to define an *electron configuration* over $$m$$ electrons, which is a tuple of $$m$$ `(Spin, Position)` pairs, where `Spin` is a two-valued property:

```haskell
data Spin = SpinUp | SpinDown
type SingleElectronConfiguration = (Spin, Position)
type ElectronConfiguration = (SingleElectronConfiguration)^m
```

The *wavefunction* over $$m$$ electrons, usually symbolized with the symbol $$\Psi$$, is a function from the electron configuration over all the electrons to a single complex number.

```haskell
type JointElectronWavefunction = ElectronConfiguration -> Complex
```

The return value of a wavefunction is called an amplitude. You can turn a wavefunction into a probability density function by taking the squared norm of the amplitude. You can calculate the expectation value of any function $$f$$ by integrating over all of space the function $$f(x) \lvert \Psi(x)\rvert ^2  $$, where $$x$$ represents the whole configuration. For example, you could use this to get an expectation value of the distance between the two electrons.

```haskell
expectation :: (ElectronConfiguration -> Real) -> Wavefunction -> Real
expectation f psi = integrateOverAllSpace
                                (\x -> f x * (norm (psi x))**2)
      where
        integrateOverAllSpace :: (ElectronConfiguration -> Real) -> Real
        -- integrate over every possible value of ElectronConfiguration
```

Wavefunctions have a few other requirements on them:

- They must be continuously differentiable.
- If you integrate the squared norm of the amplitude over the whole joint wavefunction, you get 1. (That is, `expectation (\x -> 1.0) wavefunction` must return 1.)
- The wavefunction must be antisymmetric. That is, if $$s_1$$ and $$s_2$$ are both of type `(Position, Spin)`, then $$\Psi(..., s_1, ..., s_2, ... ) = - \Psi(..., s_2, ..., s_1, ... )$$. This requirement means that the wavefunction must return 0 in the case where $$s_1 = s_2$$. (So there is no amplitude associated with the configuration where two electrons have the same position and same value of spin. This is the [Pauli exclusion principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pauli_exclusion_principle).)

A `MoleculeConfiguation` has a `NucleusConfiguration` and a `JointElectronWavefunction`.

```haskell
type MoleculeConfiguration = (NucleusConfiguration, JointElectronWavefunction)
```

### Calculating energy

The total energy of a molecule comes from:

- Potential energy from:
    - Electric repulsion between the nuclei
    - Electric attraction of the nuclei to the electrons
    - Electric repulsion between the electrons
- Kinetic energy of the electrons

To calculate the potential energies, you calculate the expectation value of the classical potential energy over the wavefunction. In atomic units, the potential between two charged particles is given by $$\frac{q_1 q_2}{r}$$, where $$r$$ is the distance between two positions and $$q_1$$ and $$q_2$$ are the two charges.

```haskell
potentialEnergy :: MoleculeConfiguration -> Real
potentialEnergy (nuclei, psi) =
  interNucleiRepulsion +
  nucleiElectronAttraction +
  electronElectronRepulsion
    where
      interNucleiRepulsion = sum [

        | xPos <- nuclei, yPos <- nuclei
      ]
```

Kinetic energy is defined as follows. The kinetic energy of the $$i$$th electron is:

$^$ -\frac{1}{2} \int \sum_{\chi \in \text{Spin}}\Psi_i(\mathbf{x}, \chi) \nabla^2 \Psi_i(\mathbf{x}, \chi) d\mathbf{x} $^$

where $$\Psi_i$$ is the wavefunction over the positions and spins of the $$i$$th electron, $$\nabla^2$$ is the [Laplacian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace_operator) and $$\mathbf{x}$$ is an integration variable going over all of space. The total kinetic energy is the sum of the individual kinetic energies.


### Approximation methods

If you can find the wavefunction which minimizes this energy, you're done. In real life, you can't actually minimize that function, so a wide variety of approximation methods are used.

Here are some common simplifying assumptions made:

- The electron wavefunction can be approximated as the product of several single-electron wavefunctions.
- The wavefunctions of electrons in an molecule can be approximated as a linear combination of the wavefunctions that electrons occupy in atoms.

One important class of approximation methods are [variational methods](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variational_method_(quantum_mechanics)). In these, you approximate the ground state energy by looking over a more restricted class of function than all possible wavefunctions. For example, you might assume that your wavefunction is a mixture of Gaussians. One important subclass of variational methods is linear variational methods, where your restricted class of wavefunctions is the set of linear combinations of a small set of basis functions.

If you liked this kind of angle on quantum mechanics, you might like to read chapters 3-4 of Thijssen's Computational Physics textbook.
