---
layout: post
title:  "A new love: the physics of electrons"
date:   "2017-07-07"
---

About two months ago, I was suddenly struck all at once by the beauty of quantum chemistry. It occured to me that the structure of matter is determined by essentially only a few simple rules, and I decided to learn them.

(I’m not kidding about the “all at once”—I was just walking down the street when suddenly I realized this, and then I got to my train and started googling and heard about the Hartree Fock method and decided to learn whatever was required to understand it.)

One interesting thing that I didn’t previously understand is that if you want to know how matter behaves at the scale of atoms and molecules—if you want to understand why things are different colors, or why lithium is a solid while helium is a gas, or why H<sub>2</sub>O is a stable molecule but H<sub>4</sub>O<sub>6</sub> isn’t—you’re going to be spending almost all your time thinking about the behavior of electrons.

Why electrons? Well, matter is mostly made of electrons and nuclei. (The nuclei have an internal structure that matters very little for everyday life, because they’re very small and tightly packed and they don’t really change in observable ways, outside of relatively rare phenomena like radioactivity.) Sure, nuclei are made out of quantum mechanics and don’t have a well-defined position and so on. But they end up being mostly a static backdrop to the stage on which electrons are starring.

This is because electrons and protons have equal charge but drastically different masses—electrons weigh about two thousand times less. So when you have an electron and a proton interacting, for example in a hydrogen atom, the electron is going to respond to the attractive force about 2000 times more strongly. To determine the properties of an atom, you can get almost exactly accurate results by treating the nucleus as a fixed point charge—for the same reason that when we’re engineering cars, we don’t stop to think about the effect of braking on the rotation of the Earth.

So almost all of chemistry, materials science, and solid state physics is about the behavior of electrons given a fixed configuration of nuclei—one nucleus if you want to think about atoms, several nuclei if you want to think about molecules, and gazillions if you want to think about the properties of solids. (This is known as the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, by the way.) If we could reliably calculate the behavior of electrons, the predictive parts of these sciences would be trivial.

It turns out that the rules for the behavior of electrons are simple enough to state. But they’re very hard to work with. We can’t calculate the exact behavior of electrons for anything more complicated than a hydrogen atom—we have to use a variety of clever approximations. So more than any other fields I’m aware of, chemistry and materials science and solid state physics are just approximations to underlying physics which is easy to understand but extremely hard to compute.

———

I wrote the phrase “behavior of electrons” above. To be more precise, what we’re looking for is a wavefunction describing the electrons. Let’s start out by talking about wavefunctions of a single electron alone in the universe.

It’s tempting to think of wavefunctions as probability distributions. After all, a wavefunction is a function from positions to a complex number which is the “amplitude” of that location for the particle, which sounds kind of like “we don’t know where the particle is, so we have a probability distribution over it”. This is wrong in a lot of ways, but to me the most compelling problem with this way of looking at it is that the behavior of the electron is affected by the gradient of the wavefunction with respect to space.

———

I want to try to explain one of my favorite ideas in quantum mechanics. It’s one of those ideas that I kick myself for not thinking of myself. I don’t know why they don’t teach it in introductory QM classes. (I’m going to explain the variational method.)

I said above that we’re interested in the behavior of electrons. One particularly important aspect of the the behavior of electrons is the lowest energy state they can occupy, given a particular set of external forces (most often, the electromagnetic force of a bunch of nuclei).

You can do a lot by reasoning about lowest energy states. For example, suppose you want to know what shape large planets will be—will they be cubes or tetrahedrons or spheres or what? The answer is that they fall into the shape with the lowest energy. In this case, the energy in question is the gravitational potential energy representing the fact that every two bits of matter want to be as close to each other as possible. Of course, the shape which minimizes this energy is a sphere.

A similar example: you want to know the shape of the surface of a swimming pool. It seems intuitive to say that swimming pools won’t on their own form big peaks at some places and troughs in others. Again, you can figure this out by finding the shape of the surface which minimizes the energy.

In the case of electrons, the states we’re looking for aren’t the shapes of surfaces but the shape of wavefunctions. These are functions from positions in space to the “amplitude” of the electron being there, which is a complex number.

Wavefunctions are not probability distributions—they’re real features of the universe. You can’t think about them as probability distributions. Remember that swimming pool above? We could talk about it having a function from the (x, y) position on the floor of the pool to the height of the water at that point on the pool. This function has a few features in common with a probability distribution—among other things, it corresponds to a fixed amount of water, and waves on the surface of the pool won’t change the total amount of water. But if you tried to think of that function as the probability distribution over a single molecule of water, you’d be horribly confused. Almost all the properties of waves on swimming pools come from the interactions between the heights of nearby locations of water on the swimming pool—most obviously, when the surface of the water isn’t flat, water from the higher bit flows towards the lower bit. For the same reason, our wave functions are fundamental properties of the universe, not probability distributions.

Now isn’t a good place to explain the energy function that we minimize in QM, but I can tell you a few qualitative details that might give you a feel for it. The key idea is that the energy function has one term which incentivizes the particle to have its wavefunction in areas with low potential as much as possible, but it also has another term which penalizes the wave function for changing shape too rapidly. The first term is minimized by a wavefunction which is entirely concentrated in areas of minimum potential (like an unmoving ball at the bottom of a valley, or an electron located inside a proton), while the second is minimized by a wavefunction which is as flat as possible.

I’ve put a more complicated and complete explanation in the following parenthetical paragraph, which you can totally skip if you want to:

(The energy of a wavefunction is the sum of its potential and its kinetic energy. The potential energy is easier to understand. Remember that the wave function has higher amplitude in places where the particle is “more likely” to be. The potential energy is just the “average” potential energy of the particle. If this was the only factor, then an electron would want to concentrate all of its wavefunction exactly on top of an electron, because that’s where the potential energy is lowest (energy is lowest at the point where the attraction points towards, just like how if you roll around under the influence of gravity you end up in a valley). The kinetic energy corresponds to the rate at which the wavefunction varies. (It’s proportional to the second derivative of the wavefunction with respect to space.) This is why electrons aren’t extremely close to protons in hydrogen atoms: that wavefunction would have very low potential energy, but its second derivative would be gigantic to get it such a sharp peak, so its kinetic energy would be high enough to make the state unattractive. I would love to explain this better by showing you a bunch of pictures and preferably some interactive widgets which let you play around with this.)

Anyway, for MYSTERIOUS REASONS there’s this function from a wavefunction to its energy, and if we know

———

One final note is that I think I now understand better why physicists are generally so bored by discussions of how to interpret quantum mechanics.
