---
layout: post
title:  "A few notes on the aestivation hypothesis"
date:   "2018-01-12"
---
**[Epistemic status: extremely speculative. Thanks to Kelsey Piper, Claire Zabel, and Daniel Filan for some conversations about this.]**

**TL;DR: One reason to think that there's no intelligent alien life in our part of the universe is that we're currently alive and seem reasonably close to having the opportunity to engage in expansion through space. It seems like there's a strong convergent instrumental goal of all civilizations to prevent competition from newcomers; so we should expect not to be here, which conflicts with our observations. I argue that with acausal trade, it becomes possible for civilizations to coordinate in a way that means that it's extremely cheap to allow newcomers to arise, and I argue that even a weak preference for newcomers being allowed to arise could lead to the universe we observe.**

The [aestivation hypothesis](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.03394) proposes as a solution to the Fermi paradox that many alien civilizations are in fact present in the observable universe and perhaps even in our galaxy, they’re just hibernating in the hope of doing more computations later.

(The reason to do computations later instead of now is that the minimum energy to do a single step of computation is given by kT, where k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the ambient temperature. So if you have a fixed amount of energy and want to do as much computation as you can, you want to be as cold as possible—the amount of computation you can do doubles every time the temperature is halved. The ambient temperature in our universe is the cosmic microwave background (CMB), which is being red-shifted and thus becoming cooler as the universe expands. This suggests a strategy of waiting a long time.)

One common objection is that currently the stars are all on fire: it’s unhelpful to wait for the CMB to cool if by that time all your stars are dead and you don’t have any energy sources. There are two possible responses to this. As the original paper points out, it seems plausible that that it's easy enough to turn matter into energy that it's not too expensive to allow stellar fusion to continue. For example, I recently heard that if you feed matter into a black hole you get about 5% of its mass back as energy emitted by the accretion disc. Stars only convert about 0.1% of their mass into energy through fusion over their normal lifespan. So if we have the option of harvesting dead stars by feeing them into black holes later, we’re only forgoing 2% of the energy in the universe if we let the stars burn out on their own. And if it turns out there’s some way of turning mass into energy with 100% efficiency, which seems maybe plausible, then we’d only be forgoing 0.1% of the energy in the universe. This is a small enough proportion that a civilization might be willing to trade it away for something. I’m going to keep using the 2% figure for concreteness, but please bear in mind it’s probably very wrong in one direction or the other.

But what would the civilization have to gain? Here’s one crazy possibility: it’s kind of unaesthetic to go through the universe putting Dyson spheres around all the stars and preventing other life from getting the chance to evolve, and it’s also kind of unaesthetic to kill off baby civilizations just as they’re getting started. (Evidence: I would not exterminate an alien race if I ran across them, which is one data point about the instincts of evolved species. Perhaps other humans have different intuitions?) Perhaps intelligent species are willing to burn on average 2% of the computation in the universe in return for this aesthetic.

But by allowing competitors to evolve, intelligent species aren’t just giving up 2% of the universe, they’re potentially giving up much more. It’s a lot easier to claim that most species are willing to give up 2% than 99.99999%.  As a species which evolved relatively late compared to the earliest time possible, we should expect that other alien races would have killed us already if they existed. In the rest of this post I provide one reason that we might be spared.

---


I claim that intelligent species could be willing and able to cooperate in a way that removes this incentive. Here’s why they’re able: Suppose that every species has the same probability distribution over when it first arises in the universe, and suppose that its utility function in amount of computation is linear. From behind the veil of ignorance, every species is indifferent between the situation where the first civilization to arise kills all others, and the situation where all civilizations share resources equally if they arise. (This is a particularly easy type of acausal trade to verify, because we’re able to causally interact with a civilization to see if they’ve committed to it.)

(If some civilizations usually arise earlier than other civilizations do, then those civilizations should be awarded more computational share than the usually-later civilizations. If across all of the spatially infinite universe, Earthlings arise before Martians 60% of the time, then the ratio between the computation that the Earthlings and Martians get should be 3:2. If one civilization always arises after another civilization, I think that that civilization doesn’t have any bargaining power in this game, and only gets spared if the earlier civilization prefers to give it some small proportion of the lightcone out of distaste for killing infant civilizations.)

So species are indifferent between getting whatever share of the universe they can grab and sharing it equally. So the preference for not destroying the universe as a birthplace for life is back to only costing 2% rather than almost 100%. So if the species are willing to make this trade, because they don’t like destroying new civilizations, they’re able to.

The 2% cost doesn’t have to be borne equally—this argument holds as long as the preference in favor for keeping the universe looking natural for the moment is worth on average 2% of the energy to a civilization, because the civilizations can trade their shares of computation in the late universe.

How do the civilizations in a galaxy ensure that new civilizations are committed to this trade? One easy option is to monitor newly arising civilizations and then see what they decide they want to try to do after they have an AGI. If they decide that they wouldn’t go along with this trade, they’re nuked from orbit or something. If the above argument is correct and obvious enough to any civilization that’s considering building enough Dyson spheres to be noticeable from Earth, maybe the nuking from orbit never needs to actually happen.

---

Kelsey Piper pointed out a strong argument against this proposal that I think mostly kills it: leaving the universe as is allows a terrible amount of suffering among both sapient and nonsapient sentient life.

I can think of two flavors of response to her point. Firstly, responses that maintain cooperation: Perhaps very few creatures care about suffering, especially the suffering of non-sapient animals. (This seems like bad news to me.) Or maybe suffering-focused value systems mostly take an aggregative view of ethics and don’t want to waste their influence on this relatively unimportant issue. Secondly, we can imagine a non-cooperative version of the above theory. The species that arose first decided that it wanted all other life to be allowed to evolve free from meddling, and all newly arising civilizations agree to that in return for being allowed to continue existing. However, this point requires that the civilization that arose first not be interested in acausal trade about this policy.

---

I don’t think the above arguments are very strong. But I do think that many of the steps of the argument are useful to practice thinking about. And I think it’s an example of the kind of weird consideration that I think we should be worried about. Before we decide to start a hedonium shockwave or something, we should think long and hard about whether we’re doing the right thing, and we should generally look for opportunities to cooperate with other agents rather than compete.
